For my Module 10 R Programming Assignment, I developed an R package called Friedman to generate examples of Friedman regression and machine learning benchmark data sets. To set up the initial package structure, I installed and loaded the usethis and devtools packages in RStudio, then used usethis::create_package() to create the package folder. The create() command opened a series of menus to edit the DESCRIPTION file with the package title, development version number 0.0.0.9000, author name and email, license, and package dependencies. I chose MIT as a permissive open license and only the R dependency to keep it simple. The primary function that I wrote is friedman_generate(), which outputs a synthetic dataset with 10 predictors and a nonlinear response variable y, generated from the Friedman #1 model. During setup, I encountered several common issues with using devtools: (1) devtools had not been installed, so I had to run install.packages("devtools"), (2) create() function was not found so I ran the correct function, usethis::create_package(), and (3) RStudio was warning about "nested projects", which I corrected by opening the .RProj file within the project folder itself. A second common issue was that I received multiple DESCRIPTION errors during devtools::check () due to the placeholder LICENSE line in the DESCRIPTION file, which I corrected using usethis::use_mit_license("David Perry"). After adding roxygen comments and running devtools::document(), the package built successfully with 0 errors or warnings from devtools::check(). Finally, I navigated to the package folder in my RStudio file browser and used the upload option to send the .tar.gz file to my GitHub repo. I learned how package structure is specified through the DESCRIPTION file metadata, how the roxygen2 documentation is created and included in the NAMESPACE and R directory, and how to solve a few common issues with setting up a new package. Overall, this assignment enabled me to understand the process of creating, testing, and publishing an R package to GitHub.
